# 18-10-2018

<!--TOC-->

**Today**: How do you link a high level programming language to the hardware world?

## Review and introduction

Last Time: Von Neumann Model w/ RISC-V (Reduced Instruction Set Computer). Modern x86 computers use CISC (Complex ISC), phones/tablets (ARM) use RISC

* Differences 
    * what makes CISC *complex* and RISC *reduced*? 
        * in RISC - fewer instructions that are *semantically atomic* - they do one thing only
        * CISC has 1-2K different instructions, some of which make the CPU do many things (e.g. loading data, performing some action, putting it back to memory in one instruction)
    * RISC has bigger executables - need more instructions to do the same thing
    * RISC compiler is simpler
* CISC came first. First RISC computer in the early 80s or something
* Why did people come up with RISC?
    * Lots of leverage in optimizing compilers - advanced compilers make stuff possible
    * Breaking up instructions allows compilers to optimize the code
    * Responsibility for improvement is moved from hardware to software

## High-level languages vs. machine code

The key difference: We consider a technical view; convenience/flexibility are not the main points. May get a different answer depending on who you ask. Prof's ideas listed here:

|High level programming language|Low level machine code|
| --- | --- |
| Few accessible states | All the states |
| Structure (of data and control) | no structure |

Aim for today is understanding **state**.

## State

Machine has memory (RAM, cache, ...). We understand a state to be a particular configuration of all the bits the machine can store (a "snapshot"). A program can be written to bring a machine into any state.

This is huge but still a finite number - can be modeled like an automaton. We have some initial state and switch between states with each execution. Is totally deterministic. 

We imagine some *state space* holding all possible states. Our aim is to keep the machine in a "good" state and out of "bad" states. Writing code is figuring out a way to stay in the realms of the good states.

High level languages reduce size of the state space dramatically. Code example:

```uint64_t* foo;``` declares the name foo, allocates 64 bits for a pointer. We now have a state space of 2^64 (came down to that from 2^4GB). Machine code that implements this has dozens of lines.

For the machine high level code is just a sequence of characters. The compiler reads these characters one at a time and disregards those that are not actual code (whitespace and comments - usually a high percentage of the code, all of this is for convenience). Only *symbols* (actual code) are considered.

e.g.: ```foo = foo + 1``` Compiler reads this word for word. Sees ```foo```, but doesn't know what to do with it - proceeds to ```=``` and only then realizes it's an assignment. Reads right hand side to figure out operands etc. Then generates according intructions and proceeds to the next line of code. Selfie translates this assignment into 6 machine instructions.

String vs. string literal: the literal is the actual string. The string is the name of the string/the pointer. e.g. ```foo = "hello world"``` - the string literal is ```hello world```. Only the string literal is relevant in the "machine world".

## Selfie

Selfie gives some statistics about the compiled/executed code (most executed instructions etc).

Selfie is a C* compiler that compiles C*. Also implements a simple RISC-V virtual machine that can run itself.

## Notes

Assignment: Look at Hello World example and generated machine code. Try to understand how the machine code implements the high-level commands.

Play around with selfie. Look at draft textbook. Try to understand output etc.

May also want to look at Python. Can implement things quickly.

## Some comments

* Computers are the most complex machinery humans ever made
* Dozens of computers in cars - hard to program, so weird bugs happen (e.g. trunk opens randomly)
* Rocket science etc knows much better how to produce correct things - CS is young, most people in the field have no clue how to write *correct* code
* Producing the first "real" compiler took ~17 years of manhours in the 50s
* New ideas in science are often discredited, only later recognized as valuable
* *Minified* code removes all of the whitespace and comments. [Obviously useless for Python etc]. Demonstrates that there is no "magic" behind code. Just a string of characters
