# 09-11-2018

<!-- Mermaid diagram support... add diags via <<{} -->
<script src=../html/mermaid.min.js></script>
<script src=../html/removeDiff.js></script>

<!--TOC-->

## Presentations  - Mortal Sins

#### Preparing slides

* Too much information on one slide - slides are not handouts
    * Build slides up partially so people don't get distracted trying to read
* Use huge font size. Do not underestimate this and stay consistent with it
* Do not copy/paste paragraphs. The phrasing is usually too long.

#### Presenting slides

* Do not block the projection with your body if possible
    * May be unavoidable - move around then
* Do not switch slides too often, ~1 slide/minute is enough... prepare number of slides accordingly [for **WAP presentation**: 23-24 slides for 20min talk]
* Know your slides and have some way to access slides quickly - e.g. ToC at the end of your talk in order to navigate to sections quickly when answering questions
* If you point something out on a slide (e.g. w/ a laserpointer) you need to make very clear what exactly you are pointing at
* Look at audience. This is important: keeps them engaged. Look at various people, do not focus on one guy [not even Prof]
* Speak clearly - not too monotone, not too fast...
* Do not read off script... spoken language is much simpler than written language
    * Can subtly glance at monitor if you stand way back near the whiteboard, is obvious if you stand right in front of monitor
    * Incline notes if you have printed versions lying on table - can see next slides that way

## Written presentations

#### Title Block

* Title block holds title, author(s), (postal or mail) address of author.
* Reader needs to decide based on title whether the text might be interesting
* Title should not use uncommon abbreviations

#### Abstract

* Tell prospective readers what to expect from the document. What has been achieved and what are the main results?
* Full paper is not neccessarily  available to someone reading the abstract - avoid citations and references to the rest of the paper
* Avoid abbreviations and uncommon terms
* Abstract is like advertising for the publication - should be sexy
* However don't promise anything that isn't delivered

#### Keywords

You have 3-6. Need to be specific: e.g. you write a paper on Dijkstra, do not choose *Graph Theory* or *Computer Science*. Formulate them after the paper, title, abstract is done. This is a nontrivial task

#### Main text

**Introduction**:

* differs from abstract in that the rest of the publication is certainly available
    * references are allowed here
* Introduction should be significantly longer, can easily be a few pages
* Should describe problem and solution in a simple way
* Serves a special purpose: must make it absolutely clear what you achieved and what might be new and discuss prior work on the subject and how it compares to yours
    * Do not overstate anything here. E.g. you read a paper that claims a,b,c,d. As you read a turns out to be wrong. You going to trust them on b,c,d?

**Main Part**:

Black box/white box theme. Black box for the "user", white box for the "scholar"

Is like a car's user manual and repair manual.

* Black box presents practical angle: Give exact problem and solution, sample applications, ...
* White box gives complexity, correctness proofs etc etc, information on basic ideas leading to the solution, ...

Do not bloat this. There is no point in including sentences which do not convey information. If your paper is assessed as "too short" this does not mean too little pages but too little content.

**Experiments and discussion**:

Must be explained such that graduate students would be able to replicate your work. Describe computing environments, test data used (if it's not public describe characteristics)

Take care with generalizations based on your experiments. You might get results conflicting prior work. Discuss this and argue succinctly why your results are superior (which, hopefully, they are) - this needs to be credible though.

**Conclusion**:

Again similar to the abstract, but we can make two assumptions: 1) Reader can read the entire paper and 2) reader has read your paper

* Refer to results in your paper, point out next steps/problems, open problems
    * Nowadays however, do not put open problems in your conclusions if you have any interest on working on this in the future

#### Referring to prior publications

[in CS and math (and likely physics)! works completely different in other fields]

You would write something like

> In previous work [12], ...

> It has been shown by X et al. [7] that ... 

For a 6-author paper you would usually put ther first, second name and then *et al.*. In CS we usually do not do verbatim quotations (this is certainly different in other fields). However a verbatim quotation could be done like this:

> X [12] stated in this context: "`$QUOTE`" ...

It is not a given that you can just copy e.g. an entire algorithm verbatim, even if you give a reference

#### Style

Chicago Manual of Style is worth following even if originally written for soft sciences. Even technical documents are written in natural language. Hence follow standard rules. Apparently a few errors are ok though.

<script src=../html/removeCaptions.js></script>
