# 16-11-2018

<!-- Mermaid diagram support... add diags via <<{} -->
<script src=../html/mermaid.min.js></script>
<script src=../html/removeDiff.js></script>

<!--TOC-->

We may want to dress really neatly on Nov 30 - Lecture will be videotaped

## Ethical Issues

* Plagiarism
    * This is hard to detect if a paper in a different ("exotic") language is plagiarized
    * also if supervisors advise 20+ students and recycle topics that give similar results even throughout the years
    * There are some electronic tools
* Data fabrication: 
    * not just coming up with total crap, but also e.g. "interpolating" to 100 if you have ~5 samples, or removing outliers (data *falsification*)

## Academic careers

There was a sharp cut in 2002 when legislation changed drastically (UG 2002). Careers starting before 2002 thus differ from those startign after.

We distinguish between tenured/non-tenured positions [tenured = more difficult to kick out] and temporary/non-temporary contracts [temporary contracts have an end date]. 

Pre-UG02 tenured positions have a very strong form of tenure: "Pragmatisierung" - you do not lose your job unless you die or get imprisoned for more than a year. This is unique to Austria

Positions: 

* Research assistants: Doktorand.
* Assistant Prof: 6yr contract, after that either habilitation or loss of job. 
* Associate Prof: Tenured but no "Pragmatisierung"
* Univ.-Prof: Highest rank
* Postdoctoral Researcher: No teaching required but allowed; paid out of research grants
* Lehrbeauftragte: external lecturers
* Honorary professors: similar to associate/full prof, on a 5yr basis
* Visiting professors: Stay for half a year, similar to ass/full prof
* Projektmitarbeiter: Paid project workers with varying degrees

## Research funding

Sources: 

* FWF
    * Rejection levels:
        * C1 - excellent proposal, but no money
        * C2 - good, but no money
        * C3 - okay, but ditto
        * C4 - forget about it
    * FWF is very competitive - you are at least decent if you get FWF funding.
    * ~15% acceptance rate
    * FWF proposals are kind of BS - need to convince reviewers
* Christian Doppler Gesellschaft
* Austrian Academy of Sciences
* Austrian Institute of Technology, Research Studios Austria, Salburg Research etc.
* Industry - some companies have surprisingly short planning horizons
* EU funds: European Research Council [ERC]

## LaTeX

We will cover basic usage. Will be covered in this, the next and possibly the lecture after that.

We start off with TeX - a typesetting system for books; especially with lots of mathematics. It is pronounced "Tech". Is a text processing system with a few predefined layouts, has device independent output. Has lots of nice features, but is rather low level. Later LaTeX simplified TeX, it sits on top of TeX and provides some macros to make text processing easier.

TeX is *not* WYSIWYG (what you see is all you've got; according to Kernighan). Modifying the layout beyond minor changes is hard. A package is recommended for graphics.

Books: LaTeX. A Document Preparation System. By Leslie Lamport; this is *the* tex(t)book; Einfuehrung in LaTeX - H. Voß; Koma-Script von M. Kohm

#### Special characters

Can be escaped via backslash

|Char|Meaning|
| --- | --- |
|`%`|Comment|

#### Syntax

Text of the document is limited via `\begin{document}` and `\end{document}`. There is a *preamble* with metainformation; e.g. if the document is to be printed on two-sided pages. 

Text is free-format. One space = 100 spaces. Word breaks are done automatically etc. Layout is completely done by LaTeX


<script src=../html/removeCaptions.js></script>
