# 23-11-2018

<!-- Mermaid diagram support... add diags via <<{} -->
<script src=../html/mermaid.min.js></script>
<script src=../html/removeDiff.js></script>

<!--TOC-->

## LaTeX

No LaTeX errors when turning in LaTeX assignment (this is autofail). Must also be somewhat human readable.

#### How to run? 

Save ASCII document as `.tex`, run via `latex $FILENAME`. If command goes through without any errors run BIBTeX and LaTeX until corss reference labels are stable [more on this later]. We end up with a `.dvi` file. Can be previewed with `xdvi` and converted to PostScript with `dvips`.

`latex` generates multiple files, including a log.

#### Document types

|Type|Description|
| --- | --- | 
|`article`|few pages long document|
|`book`|actual book|
|`report`| something in between `book` and `article`|
|`letter`| A letter.|

Options include `fleqn` for aligning math formulas, `twoside` for printing 2-sided, ... more in the Lamport

Style files can be included with environment variable `TEXINPUTS`

## Formatting

#### Sectioning

(in "descending" order)

```
\part
\chapter
\section
\subsection
\subsubsection
\paragraph
\subparagraph
```

Sections from `part` to `subsubsection` are numbered (numbers can be ommited by inserting a `*` after the command. `\paragraph`'s effect can be achieved by inserting a blank line. Not every document class supports all section types: `letter` doesn't have `\part`s.

`\appendix` puts LaTeX into "appendix mode". `\include` and `\input` insert other LaTeX files, `\include` starts on a new page while `\input` doesn't.

#### Environments

format the text in between their `\begin` and `\end` tag. There is e.g. `quote`, `verbatim` ("WYSIWYG mode")

**Lists** are also environments delimited with `itemize` and similar lists (there is also `\description` where there are no bullets but some text. List items must be put within `\item{$ITEM}` in a list environment.

`\tabbing` environment sets up appropriate column width with tabs: Can align the parenthesis in the following example

```
Kodiak Bear (Kodiak Island)
Grizzly (Western US)
```

Tables: Since they are encoded in text you can write code to generate your tables: if you run some experiments for example, can automatically output LaTeX table.

<script src=../html/removeCaptions.js></script>
