# 04-10-18

## Meta

* **To Do**
    * Learn base 2 arithmetic - powers of 2 up to 2^32
* keine Hausuebungen - Material regelmaessig anschauen
* fuer heutigen Termin nur Organisation und Motivation

Folgender Text auf Englisch - VO wird mal auf Englisch, mal auf Deutsch gehalten.

## Motivation

* mentions article on a [microchip][1] [12-10-18 Update: This story appears to have some credibility issues]
* brings in 19" server - might contain above chip
* Def.: OS - "Software that runs on a simple machine and creates the illusion of having 1000s of these machines"
* Goal: Developing "thinking tools" that allow contemplating complex processes
    * Understanding how computers execute parralel processes
        * requires understanding hardware; we're focusing on this for now

* **Von Neumann Architecture** - key idea: both program code and program data sit in main memory
    * CPU and RAM communicate via memory bus
    * GPUs are not built according to Von Neumann
        * work with another execution model
        * have same capabilites as CPU, only difference is speed - GPUs are not needed to be complete/universal, only needed for speed
    * All modern machines work this way fundamentally
* Will see machines with persistent RAM in the future - flash and RAM will merge
    * Has huge effects on OSs
    * Problem: Cannot reset RAM. Things will age, problems never go away - this is one problem in OSs rn
    * Hardware changes have huge consequences on software, problems never end
* What happens when the machine is turned on and RAM is empty?
    * CPU is "completely stupid", only knows to fetch an instruction from somewhere and execute it
        * So is memory - just "sits there and contains bits"
        * Individual steps are incredibly simple, raw amount of power is the reason computers can do anything interesting
        * "0 intelligence in this"
        * CPU can never stop executing instructions - **synchronous circuit**; there is never no "next instruction" until "turn off power" instruction is hit
    * But how to get first instructions into main memory on bootup?
        * Bootloader. Sits in BIOS chip, instructs CPU to get OS code from SSD to RAM; then connection to BIOS chip is cut and OS code takes over
            * Can update bootloader/firmware once OS loaded
        * This process is called **bootstrapping**
            * Term comes from some story about a guy pulling himself out of mud with his bootstraps - Baron Muenchhausen
* Bootstrapping happens often in CS, this is because systems are **incomplete**
* CPU components:
    * Registers - tiny memory just like RAM, but by far the fastest
    * Arithmetic Logic Units implement integer arithmetic and bitwise operations
        * they're hard to make, other ways of doing the same thing exist; however consensus is that integer arithmetic is the best way atm
    * ALUs perform these operations on the values stored in the registers
    * separate Program Counter register tells CPU where to look for code in memory.
        * Memory is **byte addressed** (that means in 8 bit steps)
            * important concept: stuff is not only stored in binary but it is also used to address memory - can use data not only as data but also as *pointers* to data
            * this is because out memory is **word aligned** meaning we can only copy full words to registers, not individual bytes/bits - 32 or 64 bit chunks are transferred each cycle
                * Length of (Machine) Words depends on CPU - 32bit or 64bit
                * Memory bus has according number of lanes
                * this is because reading a 64 bit word takes 64x longer on a single lane
    * instruction register holds currently loaded instructions
        * instructions are 32 bit, hence w/ byte addresses we load 2 instructions at a time
* Class uses 4GB RAM (4\*2^30), 32 64bit registers model
* **Big Message:** loads the 2 instructions from PC address, executes it, modifies state of the machine in some way, at the end PC changes to some other address (usually next address).
* and... Big Question. Since both code and data is in RAM, how do you differentiate code and data?
    * the OS does. The machine knows nothing. 
        * PC is the only way for the machine to know where the code is. 
        * PC points to a machine word (half a word in memory) and OS fetches the bits that are in here into the CPU 
        * CPU interprets these bits as instruction, when it is done OS tells the CPU where to put the program counter next
        * this could be the next instruction but it could also be somewhere else. 
        * Only in the moment when the PC loads the bits it is code. Only in that moment the meaning as a code is given to the bits, after PC moves on the machine may never look back there. 
    * Data only becomes data because you look at it and interpret it in certain ways
    * Code you write assigns meaning to data
    * When you add two integers the bits become numbers, after you're done the bits can become anything else.
    * The machine is mindless - where does the meaning of the code come from? - Hardwired into the CPU.

[1]: https://www.bloomberg.com/news/features/2018-10-04/the-big-hack-how-china-used-a-tiny-chip-to-infiltrate-america-s-top-companies
