### Meta

* keine Hausuebungen - Material regelmaessig anschauen
* fuer heutigen Termin nur Organisation und Motivation

### Motivation

* mentions article on a [microchip][1]
* zeigt 19" Server - o.g. Chip koennte da drauf sein, erklaert Komponenten etc
* OS: "Software that runs on a simple machine and creates the illusion of having 1000s of these machines"
* Ziel: "Denkwerkzeuge" entwickeln um ueber komplexe Prozesse nachdenken zu koennen
    * Understanding how computers execute parralel processes
        * requires understanding hardware; we're focusing on this for now

* Von Neumann Architecture - key idea: both program code and program data sit in main memory
    * CPU and RAM communicate via memory bus
    * GPUs are not built according to Von Neumann
        * work with another execution model
        * has same capabilites as CPU, only difference is speed - GPUs are not needed to be complete/universal, only needed for speed
    * All modern machines work this way fundamentally
* Will see machines with persistent RAM in the future - flash and RAM will merge
    * Has huge effects on OSs
    * Problem: Cannot reset RAM. Things will age, problems never go away - this is one problem in OSs rn
    * Hardware changes have huge consequences on software, problems never end
* What happens when the machine is turned on and RAM is empty?
    * CPU is "completely stupid", only knows to fetch an instruction from somewhere and execute it
        * So is memory - just "sits there and contains bits"
        * Individual steps are incredibly simple, raw amount of power is the reason computers can do anything interesting
        * "0 intelligence in this"
        * CPU can never stop executing instructions - **synchronous circuit**; there is never no "next instruction" until "turn off power" instruction is hit
    * But how to get first instructions into main memory on bootup?
        * Bootloader. Instructs CPU to get OS code from SSD to RAM; then connection to BIOS is cut and OS code takes over
            * Can update bootloader/firmware once OS loaded
        * This process is called **bootstrapping**
            * Term comes from some story about a guy pulling himself out of mud with his bootstraps - Baron Muenchhausen
* Bootstrapping happens often in CS, this is because systems are **incomplete**
* CPU components:
    * Registers - tiny memory just like RAM, but by far the fastest
    * Arithmetic Logic Units implement integer arithmetic and bitwise operations
        * they're hard to make, other ways of doing the same thing exist; consensus is that integer arithmetic is the best way atm
    * ALUs perform the operations on the values stored in the registers
    * separate Program Counter register tells CPU where to look in memory.
        * Memory is **byte addressed** (that means in 8 bit steps)
            * important concept: stuff is not only stored in binary but also used to address memory - can use data not only as data but also for storage
            * this is because memory is **word aligned** meaning can only copy full words to registers, not individual bytes/bits - 32 or 64 bit chunks are transferred each cycle
                * Length of (Machine) Words depends on CPU - 32bit or 64bit
                * Memory bus has according number of lanes
                * this is because reading a 64 bit word takes 64x longer on a single lane
    * instruction register holds currently loaded instructions
        * instructions are 32 bit, hence w/ byte addresses we load 2 instructions at a time
* Class uses 4GB RAM (4\*2^30), 32 64bit registers model
* Should learn base 2 arithmetic - powers of 2 up to 2^32
* **Big Message:** loads the 2 instructions from PC address, executes it, modifies state of the machine in some way, at the end PC changes to some other address (usually next address).
* Big Question. Since both code and data is in RAM, how do you differentiate code and data?
    * obviously - the OS does. The machine knows nothing. The PC is the only way for the machine to know where the code is. PC points to a machine word, half a word in memory, and the bits that are in here it will fetch into the cpu and then it will interpret these bits as a ninstruction to do something, and when it is done it will tell the cpu where to put the program coutner next, it could be the next instruction but it could als o be somewhere wlese. Only in the momen when the PC loads the bits it is code. Only in that moment the meaning as a code is given to the bits, after PC moves on the machine may never look back there. 
    * Data only becomes data because you look at it and interpret it in certain ways
    * Code you write assigns meaning to data
    * When you add two integers the bits become numbers, after you're done the bits can become anything else.
    * The machine is mindless - where does meaning come from?

[1]: https://www.bloomberg.com/news/features/2018-10-04/the-big-hack-how-china-used-a-tiny-chip-to-infiltrate-america-s-top-companies
