# 25-10-2018

Disclaimer: ~10m late and hungover.

<!--TOC-->

## Misc

Last time: looked at some code compiled by Selfie. 

Memory organization in Von Neumann: can be done any way basically, but there is an agreement on how to do this and Selfie follows this exactly. This agreement appears to be consistent across most programming languages

#### The "standard"

* Divide memory into 2 parts: *static* and *dynamic*
    * *Program break* is the point at which memory is divided
* Static vs dynamic
    * static part is usually tiny and holds the code which is not going to change
    * dynamic part holds global variables, string literals, integer literals, 

#### Notions of time

compile time and runtime.

* machine code comes out of runtime "one way or another"
* runtime is execution

#### Live and dead memory

A certain memory address is *live* because at some point in the future it will be either read or written

*Dead* memory is the opposite. These types only apply to dynamic memory.

Can we differentiate bewteen live and dead memory?

Think about this problem: Your apartment has a bunch of stuff. You want to clean up. You need to discriminate between "live" and "dead" stuff - project into the future: do you need this later or nah?

This is hard. People usually err on the "live" side. You might also have a *lot* of stuff and have to make that decision a lot of times. The more space/stuff you have, the more time you need.

So this translates to and is a key issue in memory management. CPU time is used to manage memory, so machines with more memory can actually become faster

#### Differentiating between live and dead memory

We divide the dynamic part into a stack and a heap. The stack grows from the top down and the heap from the bottom up. That means stack is upside down and grows from high addresses to low addresses

The stack is the most widely used structure for memory mamangement.

*Memory allocation problem*: Finding an address that is not used. With a stack free memory is just below where the stack ends. Stacks are also useful for implementing recursion - recursion is just a stack order.

We also utilize a heap. Is cleaned up by the garbage collector.

Stack holds local variables - when you enter a procedure the vars are pushed onto the stack and on leaving the procedure they're popped

Cannot free up memory in selfie. This is ok for any program that always terminates before running out of memory, which is the case for most programs we will write (code that takes input and calculates some output, i.e. implements a function).

There is code that just keeps running (game, browser, server, ...). This requires garbage collection

Memory leaks: cases where your program just keeps requiring more and more memory

Very few programs are free of memory leaks. Can prove for some programs that they are.

## Computer models

*Turing Completeness* (a program that can be written in a turing complete language can be written in any other turing complete language, almost all languages today are turing complete). That means all programming languages have the same expressivity. RISC-V is turing complete. 

*Finite State Machines*: Can represent your computer. But finitely many states means it forgets. In finitely many steps it will forget what it did. It has Alzheimers (it is *forgetful*) but it doesn't require any memory management. This means if you can model your program with a FSM you should do it.

Much of the code of Selfie is based on a FSM for reading source code. That means no memory management is needed to do that. 

Figure out what the minimum amount of information needed to do a job is. Then you can simplify your model and reason about correctness, maintain code etc. and it will also be more efficient. 


