# 15-11-2018

<!-- Mermaid diagram support... add diags via <<{} -->
<script src=../html/mermaid.min.js></script>
<script src=../html/removeDiff.js></script>

<!--TOC-->

## Intro

* Prof visited Boston last week. Went to *SPLASH* conference; ~600ppl attended, it's on programming languages, compilers, virtualization, ...
* Says it'll be worth it to look at the webpage - is bleeding edge in programming language research. Python, OOP etc came out of this and similar conferences
* Prof gave a recorded talk on Selfie, ~1hr; should be online soon/now
    * Is a bit more advanced though, apparently
* Today: Explaining how, given some source code written in a programming language such as C or Java, to go to machine code. How to bridge the gap from fancy stuff to simple machine instructions.
    * Understanding this will make one a much better programmer

## Review

* Code is just a textfile that is assumed to be written in a given language
* Output is machine code for a RISC-V machine (RISC-U subset)
    * Prof assumes we understand RISC-U now
* Compiler is basically a function translating bits to bits
* If semantics of machine code is understood, semantics of C\* is understood
    * Like in correctly translating German to English, both must be correctly understood
* self-compiling compiler must be bootstrapped

## Compiler stages

We have frontend and backend. This distinction is based on research by Noam Chomsky who tried to formalize natural languages. Resulted in programming languages and formal languages, even though that's not the original goal

### The Frontend

There's a "fuzzy" area between frontend and backend. Frontend is syntax analysis. It does not *understand* anything, only sees characters and tries to recognize syntactic structure

Syntax is specified in a regular expression using EBNF: keywords, braces, ...

The definition of legal symbols in C\* is on Github TODO ADD LINK

We might have to write down a single EBNF rule to define e.g. integer, character, string, identifier: By substituting the given rules into one somehow (trivial)

Instead of `integer = digit { digit }`:

```
symbols = "w" "h" "i" "l" "e" | "=" | ...
integer = ( "0" | "1" | "2" | ... | "9" ) { ( "0" | ... | "9" ) }
```

If all EBNF rules of a language can be packed into one, then a scanner exists for that language. That scanner employs a finite state machine

E.g. a comment `//` would be parsed by reading a `/`, checking if it is followed by another one and if so ignoring all characters until the next `\n`

Integers are read digit by digit and must be converted to numerical values.

We have regular grammars and context-free grammars. C\* cannot be written in a single EBNF notation because we have recursion. This is the distinguishing factor between a regular grammar and a context-free grammar. 

Syntax checking is just done via checking for correctness of input according to EBNF grammar. This is done using a *recursive-descent parser*. 


Most compilers are self compiling and are written in the language they compile.

#### Scanner

Simply takes one character after the other from input stream, transforms them into tokens. 

#### Parser

Supposed to recognize structure of the code

#### The Stack

To parse a context-free grammar, a Finite State Machine plus a stack is needed (called a *push-down automaton* - for a regular grammar a FSM suffices). 

### The Backend

Basically a code generator. Actually produces the machine code. This is usually a much bigger part of the system since it has to figure out semantics, not just notation. 

This is **part of the parser** because code is generated as soon as possible. That makes Selfie a *single pass compiler*. That means it goes over the input and generates the code without ever looking back. Most modern compilers are multi-pass compilers, this is usually for performance reasons: optimization etc. Single-pass is much simpler, however there are some complications that don't occur in multi-pass compilers.

## Random notes

Semantics of the while statement can be seen quite clearly in Selfie's code. 

Likely questions: substitute EBNF, how would parser/scanner implement given EBNF, ...

<script src=../html/removeCaptions.js></script>
