# 04-03-2019

<!--TOC-->

## Introduction

This class is about the implementation of programming languages - constructing the semantincs an meaning of a programming language on a manchine that can only manipulate bits

We are supposed to be curious and figure out whatver we don't understand)

How does the autograder work? Fill out Google form - also fill out your own grade. Put a 5 iff you have no solution, but submit something every week. Put the URL via: repo site -> click commits -> click the correct (latest) commit -> copy URL. The form ends up in a spreadsheet, timestamped

The autograder is a script in a subdirectory on the selfie repo: `self.py`; run it via `grader/self.py <assignment>`. Gives 2 at best; how to get a 1? If your solution matches selfie standards and conventions. If you don't hear from Kirsch you'll get the grade you provided

We construct the meaning by translating it to some lanugage of which we do understand/know the meaning (just like with actual languages)

We know the meaning of machine code

If we also understand the translation process, we understand the meaning of the programming language we're compiling.

Our machine code is interpreted - CPUs do the same thing, in this sense there's always an interpreter involved

If we write high level machine code, this happens:

    Semantics -> Compilation -> Interpretation
    (Human)         (Compiler)   (CPU)

We're gonna write our code in C\*, a tiny subset of C

*Compilation* means the input language is on a vastly different level of abstraction than the output language.

High level programming language <-> has structural elements

Compiler is fed high level programs with structure, out comes low level code without

Structure means control structures (while, if, ...), data structure like array acces etc. 

Both high level languages and machine code are turing complete - they're equivalent. Conjecture - Any new language isn't going to be more expressive than these

## 

Our process:

C\* code -> compiler -> RISC-U (subset of RISC-V [reduced instruction set computer {ARM}], as opposed to CISC [complex ISC - have potentially complex instructions {x86}])

RISC-U has 14 instructions, learn by heart

CPUs are von Neumann machines; GPUs are different

RISC-U CPUs don't exist, so we use an emulator (that is implemented via interpreting the instructions) written in C\*

The compiler is written in the same language it compiles, so it can become its own input (self compilation). The RISC-U emulator can then execute the produced binaries (or itself - self execution) - *self referentiality*

Example: a German dictionay defines the meaning of German in German. We are defining the meaning of C\* in C\*

A German dictionary is a bad way to learn German, but it makes sense for C\* because it's a programming language - a formalism

At some point the first compiler was written in machine code - root of the tree of programming languages

## selfie



## Assignments

* Read the readme, understand it
* Read the textbook
* Get the slides
* Fork github repo to private repo (maybe clone) 
* Add @ckirsch as collaborator on the private repo
* **First assignment**:
    * Modify the private repo such that the system prints your name (add a print statement in the main)
    * Submit the URL to the commit link with the Google form
    * **All changes relative to the master branch must be in one commit**, so create a new branch (selfie-dev-ass0 or something), commit into that. When done, create another branch of master (selfie-solution-0), squash all changes onto that, submit that commit (this can be done many ways. just figure something out). Check the commit before submitting
    * Deadline: announced on the slack channel [tomorrow...]

