### Introduction

* Time: 0800-1050, ~15min break
* extra lectures on 21-12, 01-02
* Goals: Familiarity with scientific work
* Topics
    * Scientific Literature: structure of a paper
    * Presentations, written and oral - pitfalls etc; aim is reaching an acceptable level
    * Software: Latex, Postscript, Gnuplot, pdflatex, Mathematica (just overview)
* Can skip class sometimes - long as prof isn't left alone
* Deadlines: in calendar 
* Will have to give a presentation and do a latex project as a team project:
    * **Presentation**: Can choose topic, accurate timing has impact on grade. [Website][1]
    * **Project**: Convert a few handwritten pages to Latex. [Website][2]

## 1. Scientific Work and Presentations

* **Definition**: _Scientific Literature_. Holds solutions to problems. 
    * Solving a problem is usually a loop: checking literature and thinking for yourself.
    * Alternate forms of S.L. have came up but focus here is on written documents.
        * This is because of quality control - websites etc. don't have this, Wikipedia is sometimes wrong (particularly on advanced/specialized math)
    * **Books.** Publisher agrees w/ author *before* writing starts
        * *Monographs*. Treat a specific area in a systematic/complete form w/ consistent notation etc. 
            * Can be classified as undergraduate texts - introductory - or graduate texts - assuming you already have taken a course on the topic, or research monographs - targeted towards PhD/master students aka people w/ in depth knowledge of the field. 
            * Is a collection of existing stuff put together in a coherent way
            * Writing a book is not neccessarily seen as a scientific achievement since you have not found anything new - no street cred
        * Are printed in batches aka editions, there may be minor updates in between editions
            * e.g. "2^nd rev. edition" - means *revised*, some nontrivial stuff changed. "ext." means extended
            * Batch size depends on commercial value of the book as perceived by the publisher
        * Authors receive 5-10% royalty
            * Books are a shitty way to make money
        * Quality control in publishers - decent publishers have QC. Done by people in the field (content) and "copy editors" who check grammar etc
    * **Journal Articles.** Highest valued publication, scholars are expected to publish their results in journals. 
        * Journals accept articles not based on economics, merely on the basis of quality (in theory) - not quite there in practice but not as big a focus on economics as with books
        * Survey articles in journals contain lots of references and are written by experts in the field to describe the current state of the art
            * Easy to get started in a new field from such a publication
        * Usually though publications have to contain "new" results - a shorter proof of something already counts though
        * There are ~1000 "refereed" journals in math and CS.
        * Process: Author submits manuscript to editor(s) who does QC ("refereeing"), article is then published in the next issue of the journal.
            * Issues usually hold 5-7 papers in ~100 pages. Number of issues/yr depends on journal - anywhere from monthly to quarterly
            * Yearly "volumes" hold that year's issues
        * No royalty for the author, but author doesn't pay either - journal sells subscriptions to institutions and private persons.
            * Institutional subscriptions can get expensive, $5-10K
        * This is the old fashioned model though - there is *open access* now
            * this means papers are free to access for anybody.
        * Quality control/refereeing: is standardized.
            1. Author sends manuscript to editor
            2. Editor sends manuscripts to anonymous referees
                * these are anonymous because there may only be 5-10 experts worldwide on specialized topics, don't want people to "avenge" themselves when they get a bad report and then that person submits a paper
                * there also is double blind refereeing - author name is also hidden
                    * However, takes nontrivial effort on the side of the author to hide his identity.
            3. Referee sends report to editor: assesses paper in various ways, e.g. relevance, reader interest, originality, level of detail, ... also has to assess his own level of competence
            

[1]: https://www.cosy.sbg.ac.at/~held/teaching/master_seminar_I/presentations.html
[2]: https://www.cosy.sbg.ac.at/~held/teaching/master_seminar_I/projects.html
